In this lecture, you'll learn about MPLS VPNs. MPLS stands for Multi Protocol Label Switching,
and WAN connectivity can be provided over an MPLS infrastructure.
The MPLS network is usually going to be operated by a service provider, but you will find some large
companies with their own MPLS network as well.
Traffic from multiple customers when we're using a service provider's network can travel over that providers
shared MPLS network.
So, this is a VPN service because it's traffic from multiple customers using the same shared underlying
infrastructure.
When we use MPLS VPNs, the customers are kept strictly separate from each other.
So, it is a virtual private network.
Different levels of Service Level Agreement for uptime and traffic delay and loss are usually available
at different price points.
So, this is different than a VPN going over the Internet. A VPN going over the Internet could be passing
through multiple service providers,
so it's impossible to get a single unified SLA for the end to end traffic.
But when you're using an MPLS VPN, it's going to be with one service provider that owns the MPLS
network. So, that service provider can give you guarantees for the uptime, for the delay, and the loss,
and they will often have different guarantees at different price points.
Maybe they'll have a gold class which will get really good quality,
a silver class, and a bronze class. Ethernet connections are typically used to connect down to the customer router,
and MPLS VPNs provide a full mesh topology by default.
This is different than Leased Lines, which use point-to-point links. With our point-to-point links,
if we want to have a full mesh connectivity, we would need to
put in those point-to-point links going everywhere. With MPLS,
it's different.
Maybe you've already got five sites that are connected into the MPLS VPN.
When you add a sixth site, it's automatically added with full mesh connectivity to all of the other
sites.
This is good because it means whenever one site is communicating with another site, the traffic is
going to go over the optimum path.
So looking at our MPLS VPNs, in the diagram here, we've got the service provider MPLs network.
Obviously, real world is going to be more than three routers there. To give you the terminology, a PE
is a Provider Edge router, which connects to a CE, which is a Customer Edge router,
and the routers in the middle going across the provider's core, our P routers, Provider core routers. So our PE routers
connect to the CE, which is the Customer Edge router.
You can see in the diagram here over in the top left, we've got customer A, have got an office in
New York.
The PCs in New York are in the subnet 10.0.0.0/24.
Then, we've also got site one in Boston, the PCs there are 10.0.1.0/24,
and there's a second site in Boston where the PCs behind the CE Router are in the subnet
10.0.2.0/24.
So, the example you see here is for a Layer 3 MPLS VPN.
You can also get Layer 2 VPN
that we'll get to in a minute.
So in the Layer 3  VPN, the customer sites are all in different IP subnets.
We can also have Customer B, who have also got a VPN going over that same shared core infrastructure.
Customer B have got an office in New York that's using subnet 10.0.50.0/24, and Customer B have got an
office in Boston with subnet 10.0.2.0/24.
Notice that both Customer A and Customer B have got sites that are using the same subnet 10.0.2.0/24.
That's fine because the different customers are kept strictly separate from each other, and they've
got separate routing tables. So, you can have different customers using the same IP subnet.
That will work just fine.
This is a VPN technology because we've got multiple customers going over that same shared network,
and it's Layer 3 because each site is in a different IP subnet. When we're using Layer 3 MPLS VPN,
MPLS runs across the provider's core on the PE and the P routers. The customer
CE routers do not run MPLS. They don't know anything about MPLS.
They're just configured as normal IP routers.
The customer CE routers peer at Layer 3 with the provider PE routers, let's see what that means on the next
slide, and static routes or a routing protocol run between the CE and the PE. The PE
router looks just like another customer router to the customer.
The provider's core routers are transparent to the customer. So, the customer can see the PE router because
it connects to it, but it doesn't know that the PE routers going across the core are there.
And like I said earlier, the customer sites are in different IP subnets.
So looking at our configuration here, you can see Customer A in New York, the CE routers peers with the PE router at
Layer 3. Meaning, on the CE side, we give an IP address 192.168.0.2, and on the
PE side, we give the IP address 192.168.0.1. So, the
CE router can see that it is directly connected to the PE router. For getting traffic over
to the other sites,
we can either use static routes or we can use an IGP.
In this first example, we're going to use static routes.
So on the CE router, we configure interface gig0/0 facing the PE, ip address 192.168.0.2
255.255.255.252,
and then, we're using a summary route, ip route 10.0.0.0 255.255.0.0.
The next hop is the PE, 192.168.0.1. So, that summary route takes care of the 10.0.0.1
/24
network and the 10.0.2.0/24 network.
So for configuring the CE routers, you know you just configure them as if the PE is another normal customer router,
With no MPLS configuration on CE routers at all.
All of the complicated part of the configuration is done on the PE.
routers, which you don't need to know right now because that comes under the service provider track.
You will not be tested on that.
So, we can use static routes, or we can use an IGP.
Here, I'm using RIP for the example because it's nice and simple configuration to fit on the side here.
So on the CE again, interface gig0/0, ip address 192.168.0.2 with a
/30 mask, router rip, version 2,
network 10.0.0.0, so that I'm going to advertise my internal networks, and network 192.168.0.0,
so that will enable RIP on the interface facing the PE.
Now, my internal routes will be advertised to the other sites over in Boston.
I'll also learn about the sites over in Boston as well, with my next hop address of
192.168.0.1.
So, that's how you configure it with the IGP.
All of the different routing protocols are supported technically, but what you'll often find is that
the service provider won't support them all to make their life easier.
Okay, so that was our Layer 3 MPLS VPN, and you can also get Layer 2 MPLS VPNs as well.
With these, the CE devices do not peer with the PE devices.
We don't even see the PEs are there.
The entire provider network is transparent to the customer.
The provider network acts just like it's a giant switch, and the customer sites are in the same IP subnets,
not the different IP subnets that we had with our Layer 3 VPNs.
So, this is what a Layer 2 MPLS
VPN is going to look like,
which again, got the provider's core infrastructure with their PE and their PE routers.
A CE device is going to connect into the PE. You see, for Customer A in New York, behind the CE, which is a
switch here, they're on subnet 10.0.0.0/24.
Then, they've got a site in Boston.
The PCs there are in the same subnet, 10.0.0.0/24, and the second site in Boston,
again, they're in 10.0.0.0
/24.
So what this allows to happen is across a Wide Area Network, it looks to the PCs like they're all in
the same network, and they're all in the same IP subnet.
So we can do that for Customer A, we can also do it for Customer B as well.
In our example here, Customer B are actually overlaying Layer 3 on top of the Layer 2. They've got
a router on the left with IP address 10.0.50.1/30, the router on the right is 10.0.50.2
/30.
So you can see from this, the two routers, they appear to be Layer 2 adjacent. The two routers
think they're directly connected to each other.
They don't see the provider network at all.
Some reasons why we would want to use a Layer 2 MPLS VPN,
maybe we want to cluster an application over the WAN, and to be able to do clustering for this particular
application,
all of the different servers need to be in the same IP subnet.
So maybe I've got a server with IP address 10.0.0.1.
I've got another server with IP address 10.0.0.2.
That would normally mean that they have to be in the same LAN,
but now with a Layer 2 MPLS VPN, I can put them in different sites.
So, this gives me really good redundancy.
Other reasons for using a Layer 2 MPLS VPN, maybe as a Disaster Recovery solution.
So, maybe I've got my main site.
It's Layer 2 adjacent to the Disaster Recovery site.
This makes it really easy to migrate my servers across if I do have a disaster at the main site because
we can keep the same IP address.
Some terminology for our layer 2 MPLS VPN, VPLS is Virtual Private LAN Service.
This is a multipoint Layer 2 VPN.
You saw in the example I gave you earlier,
We had three sites that were all in the same IP subnet. That would be using VPLS because I've got more than
two sites.
VPWS is a Virtual PseudoWire Service and that is a point-to-point Layer 2 VPN.
So they both work the same way,
but with VPWS, we've only got two sites. With VPLS, we've got more than 2 sites.
Okay, so that was our MPLS VPNs.
I showed you the configuration earlier for the Layer 3 VPN. It's very simple from the customer side,
so I don't need to do a lot of Demo for that.
You knew everything that was covered there already.
So, we will start with the next technology in the next lecture.